A young man leaves his boardinghouse room on an uncomfortably hot summers day in 
St. Petersburg. As he descends the steps, he is overcome with a dread of 
meeting his landlady, who lives on the floor below. He owes her several 
months rent and recoils at the thought of having to make excuses to her. 
The narrator states that this young man had fallen into a state of nervous 
depression akin to hypochondria and so avoids contact with other people. 
As he leaves the boardinghouse, the young man turns his thoughts to an 
extreme, though unspecified, act that he is thinking about committing. 
He considers himself incapable of the actif he lacks the stomach even to 
face his landlady, it seems impossible that he would ever go through with 
the deed that he now mulls. The narrator identifies the young man as the 
protagonist (our hero) and describes him as tall and handsome, with dark i
auburn hair and fine dark eyes.

The young man wears ridiculously tattered clothes, but he is so contemptuous 
of the people who live in his wretched neighborhoodwhich is filthy and 
populated with drunks, prostitutes, and tradesmenthat he feels no 
embarrassment about his shoddy appearance. He walks along in a trancelike 
state, thinking over his awful plan, again considering the idea and then 
dismissing it. The narrator informs us that, over the last month, the 
young man has grown increasingly serious about taking action, even though 
the idea of doing so has disturbed and troubled him. At this particular 
moment, he is in the middle of a rehearsal of the act. He arrives at the 
apartment house of Alyona Ivanovna, a pawnbroker. As he walks up the stairs 
to her apartment, he carefully observes the building and its inhabitants in 
connection with his plan. He introduces himself to the pawnbroker, whom he 
had first met a month earlier, as a student, and we learn that the young mans 
name is Raskolnikov. The pawnbroker is an unattractive, shabbily dressed 
old woman who is suspicious, crude, and has eyes sparkling with malice.